Keycloak Authorization Services based authz prototype (#24)
strimzi/strimzi-kafka-oauth: examples/README-authz.md

## Token based authorization with Keycloak Authorization Services

Once the Kafka Broker has obtained an access token by using Strimzi Kafka OAuth for authentication, it is possible to use centrally managed authorization rules to enforce access restrictions onto Kafka Clients.
For this Strimzi Kafka OAuth supports the use of Keycloak Authorization Services.

A custom authorizer has to be configured on the Kafka Broker to take advantage of Authorization Services REST endpoints available on Keycloak, which provide a list of granted permissions on resources for authenticated users.

> The list is fetched once, and enforced locally on Kafka Broker for each user session in order to provide fast authorization decisions.

Author: I wanted to keep the first iteration as simple as possible. I imagine refetching authorization grants would require a background service with a configurable threadpool, and period duration. The authz grants have to be fetched user-by-user so we then also have to be able to iterate over existing sessions to gather the access tokens ... It also depends on the typical lifetime of Kafka session. If these are short enough one can forego reauthorization altogether.

> ## Authorization example

Author: Did some segmantation into chapters.

Before using the example, we first need to build the project, and prepare resources.

First change the current directory to `examples/docker`:

    cd examples/docker

Now build the project, and prepare resources:

    mvn clean install -f ../..
    mvn clean install

We are now ready to start up the containers and see Keycloak Authorization Services in action.

First make sure any existing containers with the same name are removed, otherwise we might use previous configurations:

    docker rm keycloak kafka zookeeper
    
Let's start up all the containers with authorization configured, and we'll then perform any manual step, and explain how everything works.

    docker-compose -f compose.yml -f keycloak/compose.yml -f keycloak-import/compose.yml -f kafka-oauth-strimzi/compose-authz.yml up --build

When everything starts up without errors we should have one instance of `keycloak` listening on localhost:8080.
You can login to admin console by opening `http://localhost:8080/auth/admin` and using `admin` as both username, and a password.

In upper left corner under Keycloak icon you should see `Master` selected as a current realm.

> Moving the mouse pointer over it should reveal two additional realms - `Demo` and `Kafka-authz`.

Author: That's a quirk of Keycloak Admin Console. Here I refer to navigation labels where Keycloak capitalizes realm names to get a label.

This is convenient for microservices which typically act in their own name, and not as agents of a particular user (like a web site would, for example).
Service accounts can have roles assigned like regular users.
They can not, however, have groups assigned.
As a consequence, if you want to target permissions to microservices using service accounts, you can't use Group policies, but are forced to use Role policies.
Or, thinking about it another way, if you want to limit certain permissions only to regular user accounts where authentication with username and password is required, you should use Group policies, rather than Role policies.
That's what we see used in `permissions` that start with 'ClusterManager'.
Performing cluster management is usually done interactively - in person - using CLI tools. 
It makes sense to require the user to log-in, before using the resulting access token to authenticate to Kafka Broker.
In this case the access token represents the specific user, rather than the client application.

Before continuing, there is one setting we need to check.

> Due to [a little bug in Keycloak](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/KEYCLOAK-12640) the realm is at this point misconfigured, and we have to fix the configuration manually.

Reviewer: I think we should track this bug maybe with an issue here, in order to remember to remove this section when the Keycloak bug will be fixed and the workaround not needed anymore.

Author: Good idea.

Author: @ppatierno What is the standard practice for tracking external issues 'here'? Creating a new Issue and linking to external one in its description, then just leaving it open and occasionally checking it?

Reviewer: @mstruk yes, it's the only way I know :-/

Under `Clients` / `kafka` / `Authorization` / `Settings` make sure the `Decision Strategy` is set to `Affirmative`, and NOT to `Unanimous`. Click `Save` after fixing it.

>   

Reviewer 2: New subsection: Testing with clients

Author: I created several chapter. This one I called 'Authorization in Action Using CLI Clients'

With configuration now in place, let's create some topics, use a producer, a consumer, and try to perform some management operations using different user and service accounts. 

> First, we'll spin up a new docker container based on Kafka image previously built by `docker-compose` which we'll use to connect to already running Kafka Broker.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First, we'll spin up a new docker container based on a Kafka image previously built by `docker-compose` which we'll use to connect to the already running Kafka Broker.
```

    docker run -ti --rm --name kafka-cli --network docker_default strimzi/example-kafka /bin/sh
    
Let's try to produce some messages as client `team-a-client`.

> First, we prepare a configuration file with authentication configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First, we prepare a Kafka consumer configuration file with authentication parameters.
```

```
cat > ~/team-a-client.properties << EOF
security.protocol=SASL_PLAINTEXT
sasl.mechanism=OAUTHBEARER
sasl.jaas.config=org.apache.kafka.common.security.oauthbearer.OAuthBearerLoginModule required \
  oauth.client.id="team-a-client" \
  oauth.client.secret="team-a-client-secret" \
  oauth.token.endpoint.uri="http://keycloak:8080/auth/realms/kafka-authz/protocol/openid-connect/token" ;
sasl.login.callback.handler.class=io.strimzi.kafka.oauth.client.JaasClientOauthLoginCallbackHandler
EOF
```

> In Keycloak Console you can find which roles are assigned to `team-a-client` service account, by selecting `team-a-client` under `Clients` section,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the Keycloak Console you can find which roles are assigned to the `team-a-client` service account, by selecting `team-a-client` in the `Clients` section,
```

> and then opening `Service Account Roles` tab for the client.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and then opening the `Service Account Roles` tab for the client.
```

> You should see `Dev Team A` realm role assigned. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You should see the `Dev Team A` realm role assigned. 
```

> We can now use this configuration with Kafka CLI tools.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We can now use this configuration with Kafka's CLI tools.
```

Make sure the necessary classes are on the classpath:

    export CLASSPATH=/opt/kafka/libs/strimzi/*:$CLASSPATH

> Now let's try produce some messages to topic 'my-topic':

Reviewer: Starting from here, it seems that text is in "italics"

Author: Looks good [here](https://github.com/mstruk/strimzi-kafka-oauth/blob/authz/examples/README-authz.md).

```
bin/kafka-console-producer.sh --broker-list kafka:9092 --topic my-topic --producer.config=$HOME/team-a-client.properties
First message
```

When we press `Enter` to push the first message we receive `Not authorized to access topics: [my-topic]` error.

`team-a-client` has a `Dev Team A` role which gives it permissions to do anything on topics that start with 'a_', and only write to topics that start with 'x_'.

> Topic named `my-topic` does not fall in either of these two.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The topic named `my-topic` matches neither of those.
```

Use CTRL-C to exit the CLI application, and let's try to write to topic `a_messages`.

```
bin/kafka-console-producer.sh --broker-list kafka:9092 --topic a_messages --producer.config ~/team-a-client.properties
First message
Second message
```

> We can see some warnings but looking at Kafka container log there is DEBUG level output saying 'Authorization GRANTED'.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Although we can see some unrelated warnings, looking at the Kafka container log there is DEBUG level output saying 'Authorization GRANTED'.
```

Use CTRL-C to exit the CLI application.
 
Let's now try to consume the messages we have produced.

    bin/kafka-console-consumer.sh --bootstrap-server kafka:9092 --topic a_messages --from-beginning --consumer.config ~/team-a-client.properties

This gives us an error like: 'Not authorized to access group: console-consumer-55841'.

The reason is that we have to override the default consumer group name - `Dev Team A` only has access to consumer groups that have names starting with 'a_'.
Let's set custom consumer group name that starts with 'a_'

    bin/kafka-console-consumer.sh --bootstrap-server kafka:9092 --topic a_messages --from-beginning --consumer.config ~/team-a-client.properties --group a_consumer_group_1

> We should now receive all the messages for 'a_messages' topic, after which the client blocks waiting for more to come down the stream.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We should now receive all the messages for the 'a_messages' topic, after which the client blocks waiting for more messages.
```

Use CTRL-C to exit, and let's list the topics:

    bin/kafka-topics.sh --bootstrap-server kafka:9092 --command-config ~/team-a-client.properties --list
    
We get one topic listed: 'a_messages'.

Let's try and list the consumer groups:

    bin/kafka-consumer-groups.sh --bootstrap-server kafka:9092 --command-config ~/team-a-client.properties --list

Similarly to listing topics, we get one consumer group listed: `a_consumer_group_1`.

> There are more CLI administrative tools. For example we can try get default cluster configuration:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are more CLI administrative tools. For example we can try to get the default cluster configuration:
```

    bin/kafka-configs.sh --bootstrap-server kafka:9092 --command-config ~/team-a-client.properties --entity-type brokers --describe --entity-default

But that will fail with `Cluster authorization failed.` error, because this operation requires cluster level permissions which `team-a-client` does not have.

Let's prepare a configuration for `team-b-client`:

```
cat > ~/team-b-client.properties << EOF
security.protocol=SASL_PLAINTEXT
sasl.mechanism=OAUTHBEARER
sasl.jaas.config=org.apache.kafka.common.security.oauthbearer.OAuthBearerLoginModule required \
  oauth.client.id="team-b-client" \
  oauth.client.secret="team-b-client-secret" \
  oauth.token.endpoint.uri="http://keycloak:8080/auth/realms/kafka-authz/protocol/openid-connect/token" ;
sasl.login.callback.handler.class=io.strimzi.kafka.oauth.client.JaasClientOauthLoginCallbackHandler
EOF
```

> If we look at `team-b-client` client configuration, under 'Service Account Roles' we can see that it has `Dev Team B` realm role assigned.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If we look at `team-b-client` client configuration in Keycloak, under 'Service Account Roles' we can see that it has the `Dev Team B` realm role assigned.
```

> Looking in Keycloak Console at `kafka` client's `Authorization` tab where `Permissions` are listed, we can see the permissions that start with 'Dev Team B ...'.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Looking in Keycloak Console at the `kafka` client's `Authorization` tab where `Permissions` are listed, we can see the permissions that start with 'Dev Team B ...'.
```

> These match the users and service accounts that have 'Dev Team B' realm role assigned to them. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These match the users and service accounts that have the 'Dev Team B' realm role assigned to them. 
```

Let's try produce some messages to topic 'a_messages' as `team-b-client`:

```
bin/kafka-console-producer.sh --broker-list kafka:9092 --topic a_messages --producer.config ~/team-b-client.properties
Message 1
```

We get `Not authorized to access topics: [a_messages]` error as we expected. Let's try to produce to topic `b_messages`:

```
bin/kafka-console-producer.sh --broker-list kafka:9092 --topic b_messages --producer.config ~/team-b-client.properties
Message 1
Message 2
Message 3
```

This should work fine.

What about producing to topic `x_messages`. `team-b-client` is only supposed to be able to read from such a topic.

```
bin/kafka-console-producer.sh --broker-list kafka:9092 --topic x_messages --producer.config ~/team-b-client.properties
Message 1
```

We get a `Not authorized to access topics: [x_messages]` error as we expected. 
Client `team-a-client`, on the other hand, should be able to write to such a topic:

```
bin/kafka-console-producer.sh --broker-list kafka:9092 --topic x_messages --producer.config ~/team-a-client.properties
Message 1
```

However, we again receive `Not authorized to access topics: [x_messages]`. What's going on?

> The reason for failure is that while `team-a-client` can write to `x_messages` topic, it does not have a permission to create one if it does not yet exist.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The reason for failure is that while `team-a-client` can write to `x_messages` topic, it does not have a permission to create a topic if it does not yet exist.
```

We now need a power user that can create a topic with all the proper settings - like the right number of partitions and replicas.

Let's create a configuration for user `bob` who has full ability to manage everything on Kafka cluster `cluster2`.

> First, `bob` will authenticate to Keycloak server with username and password and get a refresh token.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First, `bob` will authenticate to Keycloak server with his username and password and get a refresh token.
```

```
export TOKEN_ENDPOINT=http://keycloak:8080/auth/realms/kafka-authz/protocol/openid-connect/token
REFRESH_TOKEN=$(./oauth.sh -q bob)
```

This will prompt you for a password. Type 'bob-password'.

We can inspect the refresh token:

    ./jwt.sh $REFRESH_TOKEN

By default this is a long-lived refresh token that does not expire.

Now we will create the configuration file for `bob`:

```
cat > ~/bob.properties << EOF
security.protocol=SASL_PLAINTEXT
sasl.mechanism=OAUTHBEARER
sasl.jaas.config=org.apache.kafka.common.security.oauthbearer.OAuthBearerLoginModule required \
  oauth.refresh.token="$REFRESH_TOKEN" \
  oauth.client.id="kafka-cli" \
  oauth.token.endpoint.uri="http://keycloak:8080/auth/realms/kafka-authz/protocol/openid-connect/token" ;

> sasl.login.callback.handler.class=io.strimzi.kafka.oauth.client.JaasClientOauthLoginCallbackHandler

Reviewer 2: I don't think it matters (i.e. I think JAAS is happy with a single line config), but I'll point out that the `\` escapes are interpreted by the shell and do not become \ escapes for the newlines in the properties file.

Author: Yes, this is for the benefit of the reader, reading MarkDown on GitHub, so that the lines don't get truncated by viewport.

EOF
```

> Note that we use `kafka-cli` public client for clientId. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that we use the `kafka-cli` public client for the `oauth.client.id` in the `sasl.jaas.config`.
```

Since that is a public client it does not require any secret.

> We can use this, because we authenticate with a token directly (in this case a refresh token is used to request an access token behind the scenes which is then sent to Kafka broker for authentication).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We can use this because we authenticate with a token directly (in this case a refresh token is used to request an access token behind the scenes which is then sent to Kafka broker for authentication, and we already did the authentication for the refresh token).
```

> Let's now try to create `x_messages` topic:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's now try to create the `x_messages` topic:
```

The operation should succeed. We can list the topics:

    bin/kafka-topics.sh --bootstrap-server kafka:9092 --command-config ~/bob.properties --list

If we try the same as `team-a-client` or `team-b-client` we will get different responses.

    bin/kafka-topics.sh --bootstrap-server kafka:9092 --command-config ~/team-a-client.properties --list
    bin/kafka-topics.sh --bootstrap-server kafka:9092 --command-config ~/team-b-client.properties --list

Roles `Dev Team A`, and `Dev Team B` both have `Describe` permission on topics that start with 'x_', but they can't see the other team's topics as they don't have `Describe` permissions on them.

We can now again try to produce to the topic as `team-a-client`.

```
bin/kafka-console-producer.sh --broker-list kafka:9092 --topic x_messages --producer.config ~/team-a-client.properties
Message 1
Message 2
Message 3
```

This works.

If we try the same as `team-b-client` it should fail.

```
bin/kafka-console-producer.sh --broker-list kafka:9092 --topic x_messages --producer.config ~/team-b-client.properties
Message 4
Message 5
```

> But `team-b-client` should be able to consume messages from `x_messages` topic:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But `team-b-client` should be able to consume messages from the `x_messages` topic:
```

## Token Based Authorization with Keycloak Authorization Services

Once the Kafka Broker has obtained an access token by using Strimzi Kafka OAuth for authentication, it is possible to use centrally managed authorization rules to enforce access restrictions onto Kafka Clients.
For this Strimzi Kafka OAuth supports the use of Keycloak Authorization Services.

A custom authorizer has to be configured on the Kafka Broker to take advantage of Authorization Services REST endpoints available on Keycloak, which provide a list of granted permissions on resources for authenticated users.

> The list is fetched once, and enforced locally on the Kafka Broker for each user session in order to provide fast authorization decisions.

Reviewer 3: > The list is fetched once

Is it once per user session? I.e. disconnecting it and connecting again would get a fresh list? Would some time based limit make more sense here? This could be a security issue for many users.

Author: Yes, it is once per connection (Kafka broker session) currently.

I guess adding periodic refresh is the next thing to add as @tombentley has also [expressed concern about this](https://github.com/strimzi/strimzi-kafka-oauth/pull/24#discussion_r367803753).

Under `Groups` we can see several groups that can be used to mark users as having some permissions.
In Keycloak the groups can be stored in an LDAP identity provider.
That makes it possible to make some user a member of some group - through custom LDAP server admin UI for example, which grants them some permissions on Kafka resources.

Under `Users` click on `View all users` button to see two users defined - `alice` and `bob`. They are both members of some group. 
In Keycloak the users can be stored in an LDAP identity provider.

Under `Roles` we can see several realm roles which can be used to mark users or clients as having some permissions.
Roles are a concept analogous to groups. One exception in Keycloak is that roles can not be stored in an LDAP identity provider.

Under `Clients` we can see some additional clients configured - `kafka`, `kafka-cli`, `team-a-client`, `team-b-client`.
The client with client id `kafka` is used by Kafka Brokers to perform the necessary OAuth2 communication for access token validation, 
and to authenticate to other Kafka Broker instances using OAuth2 client authentication.

> This client also contains Authorization Services resource definitions, policies and authorization scopes used to perform authorization on Kafka Brokers.

Reviewer 3: To many users, this does not mean anything. Can we get some clarity on what these are here?

Author: These are somewhat abstract concepts, not entirely easy to explain. For starters we could add a link to [Keycloak Authorization Services docs](https://www.keycloak.org/docs/latest/authorization_services/index.html).
Maybe manage to put together a short explanation that would be enough to get started.

The client with client id `kafka-cli` is a public client that can be used by command line tools when authenticating with username and password to obtain an access token or a refresh token.

Clients `team-a-client`, and `team-b-client` are confidential clients representing services with partial access to Kafka topics.

The authorization configuration is defined in `kafka` client under `Authorization` tab.
This tab becomes visible when `Authorization Enabled` is turned on under `Settings` tab.

## Authorization Services - Resources, Authorization Scopes, Policies and Permissions

If we take a look under `Resources` sub-tab of `Authorization` tab, we'll see the list of resource definitions.
These are resource specifiers - patterns in a specific format, that are used to target policies to specific resources.
The format is quite simple. For example:

- `kafka-cluster:cluster-1,Topic:a_*`  ... targets only topics in kafka cluster 'cluster-1' with names starting with 'a_'

If `kafka-cluster:XXX` segment is not present, the specifier targets any cluster.

- `Group:x_*` ... targets all consumer groups on any cluster with names starting with 'x_'

> The possible resource types mirror the Kafka authorization model (Topic, Group, Cluster).

Reviewer 3: The KAfka AuthZ model has a lot more than these 3. So can this work with all of them?

Author: Based on the [Kafka documentation](https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/#resources_in_kafka) the different resource types are: Topic, Group, Cluster, Transactionald, and DelegationToken. 

TransactionalId is supported, but I did not add support for DelegationToken since I imagine that's never used in conjunction with OAuth. If it is, it would require Authorizer to also work with non-oauth authentication, when there is no JWT token available.

Reviewer 3: I'm not completely sure about the `DelegationToken`. But keep in mind this:
* There is only one authorizer per cluster
* There might be different interfaces with different auths and that is why we have the fallback option to the Simple authorizer.

So I think it is fine if we don't expect any `DelegationToken` rules in Keycloak. But there migth be usecases when we need to pass it to the fallback SImpleACLAuthorizer.

Author: I added all in the code, for completeness.
